
Semi-annual report marine pilot aquaculture project (NOAA Award NA18NMF4720007)

Period 5/1/19 – 10/31/19

A.    Project summary

Given the supreme importance of maintaining ecological security in expanding shellfish farming to meet the global demand for environmentally sustainable protein, our goal is to engage a novel mix of disciplines to create new knowledge leading to an optimal approach for conferring sterility in emerging shellfish species. The initial step in this approach is the identification of genes involved in germ cell fate at the earliest developmental stages in geoducks. We anticipate identifying several germ cell- specific genes that when disrupted effectively turn off germ cell differentiation, yielding sterile products that do not undergo gonadogenesis, exhibit superior performance, and cannot disrupt genetic structure of ecosystems. 

B.   Summary of progress and results

Initial testing on embryo handling and optimization of cell dissociation protocols was performed. Due to the lack of mature geoducks in the summer months, diploid Pacific oyster embryos were used for testing. Our objectives for testing included 1) identifying whether we could hold gametes for 12-24 hrs. prior to fertilization, 2) gaining a better understanding the developmental rate of embryos at 20C and 4C, and 3) optimizing the cell dissociation protocol for bivalve embryos. As a result of this testing we found that 1) unfertilized gametes could be held overnight at 4C with no effect on fertilization, 2) we could ‘suspend’ development of a particular cleavage stage by storing embryos at 4C, 3) identified an optimized protocol for obtaining single cell suspension that resulted in live, single cell suspension. A presentation on the project was given at the Pacific Coast Shellfish Growers Meeting in September and is available at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9973361


C.   Challenges

None
